If your device has a microphone, you can translate spoken words and phrases. In some languages, you can hear the translation spoken aloud. Important: If you use an audible screen reader, we recommend you use headphones, as the screen reader voice may interfere with the transcribed speech. Translate with a microphone Important: Supported languages vary by browser. You can translate with a microphone in Chrome and there’s limited support in Safari and Edge. Give your browser permission to use your microphone and check your microphone settings on your browser. On a Mac: Microphone settings are in the System Preferences . On a PC: Microphone settings are in the Control Panel . On Android: Open Settings . Tap Privacy . Turn on microphone access. On iOS: Open Settings. Tap Privacy Microphone . Next to “Google Translate,” turn on microphone access. On your computer, go to Google Translate . Choose the languages to translate to and from. Translation with a microphone won’t automatically detect your language. At the bottom, click the Microphone . Speak the word or phrase you want to translate. When you're finished, click Stop . Listen to translations spoken aloud Go to Google Translate . Choose the languages to translate to and from. In the text box, enter content you want to translate. To hear the translation, click Listen . Tip: To change the audio speed, click Settings at the top right and select Normal , Slow , or Slower . Troubleshoot error messages Need permission to use microphone Voice input isn't supported on this browser If you get an error message that says "Voice input isn’t supported on this browser," try to use a different browser. Chrome is the only browser that’s fully supported. Voice input isn't available If you get an error message that says "Voice input isn’t available" for the selected language, this feature is not available for the language. We're having trouble hearing you If you get an error message that says "We're having trouble hearing you," try these steps: Move to a quiet room. Use an external microphone. Turn up the input volume on your microphone. Related resources