Q. What is my Utica University email address and how do I use it? A. Your email address is typically your first initial, middle initial, and your last name, but not always. To get your email address username and password simply go to http://password.utica.edu . Follow the instructions on that page to obtain all your account information. Q. I already have an email address I use everyday, why should I use my Utica email too? A. You need to check your Utica email because your professors as well as campus offices, like Student Financial Services and Student Success, will send important information to that email. Notices about campus events and activities will also get sent to you over email. Messages sent from your Utica email to other Utica email addresses will not get marked as spam; so you can be sure that your instructor or advisor receives your email. Tutorials for email and other Microsoft services can be found at the bottom of this page. Q. How do I use the Utica Computer Labs? A. To use the computer labs you must login to each computer. This is the same as your login to email. Remember to sign out when you are done by clicking on the Start Menu, then the person icon, and Sign Out. Q. What do I do if I ever forget the password for my campus accounts? A. Forgetting your password isn't the end of the world. All you need to do is go to the Utica password website to reset your password. This site is also the place to go to change your password, which is required every 120 days. Q. What type of computer should I bring to college? A. Laptops are generally recommended over desktop computers due to portability. Many students choose to bring their laptops to class to aid in coursework. In regards to Windows vs Apple macOS vs ChromeOS, this partially depends on the academic program you'll be participating in at Utica. Some academic programs require special software that will only operate on Windows based computers. We recommend you contact your academic advisor regarding this. We currently do not recommend use of any brand of ChromeOS laptop. These are essentially just a web browser and cannot run any special software. Apple computers fall somewhere in between. You'll be able to run some software such as Microsoft Office (free), SPSS, and Adobe Creative Suite, on an Apple laptop but not other software such as Analyst's Notebook, Revit Architecture, and some specialty software for Cybersecurity/Forensics just to name a few. Again we suggest contacting your advisor to inquire about the software that will be used in your classes. Please also see our Supported Devices, Prohibited Devices, and Recommended System Specifications sections on our Networking and Infrastructure page . Q. Can I get on the Internet from my residence hall? A. All main campus residence halls, excluding Pioneer Village, have access to the Internet via Utica's wired ethernet network. Additionally wireless Internet is available for most devices in most rooms. Internet in off-campus housing may differ, contact the Student Living and Campus Engagement office for details. View the Devices tab below for more information. Q. What do I need to connect my computer to the Internet in the residence halls? A. To connect you must have a computer with an ethernet card installed and your own ethernet cable, or a computer with an 802.11g better wireless card. More information is available on the Devices tab below page. Q. Can I bring my own Wireless or networking equipment? A. NO . Servers, access points, routers, switches, hubs, and other equipment are not permitted . Don't bring them to campus because they will not work with our network. See the Devices tab below for more information. Q. Where is wireless Internet available on campus? A. Wireless is available in nearly all campus buildings. Keep in mind that even though wireless is available in most places, it isn't always as easy to find a power outlet. Charge up in advance of going to class or going to study. Q. Can I play online games or download music? A. In order to keep our network working properly for academic purposes we may limit downloading and gaming, and we cannot guarantee every game will work through our network. Music downloads are only allowed if they are legal, such as through iTunes. Violations of copyright are punishable by law as well as the student code of conduct. Q. What technology services does Utica provide to me? A. There is a long list of services for students: In the Summer of 2025 the University has transitioned from primarily Google services to Microsoft Services. Your Microsoft account will have your email and calendar (Outlook), cloud file storage (OneDrive), access to the Microsoft Office suite of software, and more. Tutorials can be found at www.utica.edu/ITguides . 3rd party financial transactions, including in-app purchases are not allowed with Utica accounts. You'll need to use a personal Gmail or Microsoft account for any services which require payment, and some services may not be available using a Utica account (such as YouTube TV with educational discount). Utica provides black and white laser printing free from our Computer Labs. Color printing is available in our Library and is limited to 50 pages per year. More page can be purchased if needed but it's rarely necessary. IITS User Services is available to help with basic questions about campus technology or use of the computer labs. The Help Desk cannot fix students' personal computers but we will try to answer questions and give advice on how to fix problems. Access to your records (transcript, schedule, financial aid, etc.) online with BannerWeb . Online and Distance Learning classes, as well as some campus classes will utilize either Engage or Canvas . Instructors can setup these sites to allow you to submit homework digitally, use online forums to discuss class, get information the instructor posts for you, and more. Access to our Library Databases . ....and much more. Q. Who can I contact if I need more help? A. For assistance, create a ticket at www.utica.edu/help . If you are unable to make a ticket online, call us at 315-792-3115 and leave a message. A technician will get back to you as soon as possible. You can also found our list of tutorials and instructions for various systems at www.utica.edu/ITguides .