Reach your goals We're on a mission to empower our members to save smarter. So we've created savings accounts that help you visualize your financial milestones—and give you guidance at every step of the way. Regular savings This is the first account every member gets. An opening deposit of just five bucks makes it painless to get started saving—and you earn almost double the national average. $5 minimum opening deposit and balance $50 minimum balance required to earn dividends May be used as an overdraft protection source Open an account Money market Tiered Annual Percentage Yield (APY) means the more you save, the more you earn. While most money market accounts have high deposit or opening balance requirements, our money market account has no minimum balance, no minimum opening deposit, and no monthly fees. No minimum opening deposit or balance Make deposits anytime May be used as an overdraft protection source Let's get started Supplemental savings Still hiding emergency funds under your mattress? Our supplemental savings account is a perfect way to stash some cash for covering unexpected costs, large expenses, or special purchases. No minimum opening deposit or balance $50 minimum balance required to earn dividends May be used as an overdraft protection source Let's get started Goal savings Saving money is more rewarding when you're working toward something special. A Goal Savings account helps you bring your goal into focus and keep track of your progress all in our mobile app. Open up to five accounts, each with a customizable goal No minimum opening deposit or balance No early withdrawal fees No maturity date—YOU choose when to spend your savings Get started Holiday club Rushing around and buying gifts all at once can be stressful. Holiday club accounts help you put away money throughout the year, and the funds you've saved automatically transfer into your regular savings account just in time for holiday shopping. No minimum deposit or balance required Open at any time during the year Funds transfer to your regular savings account on October 1 Let's get started Vacation club Take the stress out of getting away from it all. With a Vacation Club account, you can save up for the trip of a lifetime—a little at a time. No minimum deposit or balance required Open at any time during the year Funds transfer to your regular savings account on April 1 Let's get started Youth club For younger members, we offer two club options. Kids 1st Club iMember Club Ages 0-12 years Ages 13-19 years $5 minimum opening deposit $5 minimum opening deposit Free piggy bank for opening club account Eligible to open a Checking Account Small toy from treasure chest each time they make a $5 deposit at a local branch Eligible for a Visa debit card Offerings that are anything but standard You can get a savings account anywhere. Here's what makes saving with Members 1st different. MyConcierge™ Have questions? Good thing your concierge has your back. Half personal sidekick, half financial wizard, your concierge knows money management like the back of their hand. Best of all, they're here whenever you need them. Save for big plans—a little at a time Whether you access your account online or through our mobile app, you'll be able to create simple, customized goals that help keep your savings on track. And if you ever have questions, we offer 24/7 support. Rates that grow your money Your goals may be closer than you realize—our certificate dividend rates are often higher than the national average. Save Easily, Budget Successfully, Career and Education Benefits of Youth Savings Accounts Give your child a head start on financial success. Discover how youth savings accounts make learning to save fun, rewarding and empowering. Read More Save Easily, Budget Successfully Ways to Save an Extra $100 (or More) Every Month Small changes can make a big impact. Discover simple, everyday ways to save an extra $100 (or more) each month without giving up what you love. Read More Spend Carefully, Budget Successfully When Should You Use a Debit Card vs. a Credit Card? When should you use your debit card vs. your credit card? We break down how each works, the perks they offer and the best times to use them. Read More Common Questions You only need a $5 minimum opening deposit and balance in a Regular Savings Account to get started. Our certificate accounts require a minimum $500 opening deposit. Both are savings accounts. A traditional savings account requires a small initial opening deposit and balance. You can add funds or withdraw funds at any time. Money markets are tiered savings accounts that offer higher dividend rates based on your account balance. You may access your funds at any time. Money markets are designed for longer term savings without being locked into a set saving term like a certificate. Good question! You can make as many withdrawals or transfers from your savings account as you want. Find a nearby branch Account Opening Disclosures Get started in three easy steps Open a Members 1st savings account with a $5 minimum opening deposit Create personalized savings goals Manage and track your progress with our mobile app We're Here to Help Getting Ready for Life's Moments and Milestones Visa Signature ® Card Get 1.5% cash back (or 1.5 points) on every dollar you spend. On top of that, you get emergency medical coverage, trip interruption insurance, and Visa Signature Concierge Service—all with no annual fee. Get Started Buying a House Your home will likely be the biggest investment you ever make. Here’s everything you need to know—and who to talk to if you’d like some personalized guidance. Get Started Goal Savings Save for big plans—a little at a time. With great rates and powerful in-app tools, it’s never been easier to set (and achieve) your long-term goals. Get Started Protect Protecting what you care about shouldn’t be complicated or unaffordable. Our third-party insurance partners offer a full range of personal, group, auto, health and life insurance plans through the most respected companies in the business. Get Started Hit the Road Hear that? It’s the open road calling. Here’s how to get an auto loan quicker and smarter. Get Started Off to College Welcome to the start of a new beginning! Here's how to avoid student loans and make the most of saving for college. Get Started TOP Please be aware that by continuing you will be leaving www.members1st.org and viewing content from another website. For your protection please be advised that public Internet email is not secure. Various links within our web site allow you to submit information to us by public Internet email. Please DO NOT provide personal or account information through public email or submit any personal information that would compromise your identity including your account number, social security number, credit card numbers, electronic services PINs, passwords or mother's maiden name. Members 1st will not respond via public Internet email to requests-for-account-information or account activity. Please contact Customer Service with these types of requests at (800) 237-7288 or (717) 795-6049.