Reading has a paramount influence on all of us, especially children. Hence, it makes sense and is imperative to read the right stuff to kids in their early years. Moral stories for kids are just great to start with. These short moral stories for kids impart life lessons in a fun amusing way, while helping them learn to differentiate between just & unjust and building moral values right from the early stages of life . Delve into our amazing list of 35 moral stories for kids that are equally entertaining and enlightening for adults too. Table of Contents: Why Read Moral Stories to Kids? Reading moral stories to kids help impart life values without being preachy. Moral and ethics contribute immensely to the character and have a deep impact on shaping children. Moral stories for kids, just like reading, are not only a wonderful way to build literacy skills but also a subtle, effective way to lay strong moral foundation. Reading moral stories together help children assimilate family values and ethics, giving them a strong grounding. Help Kids build Resilience Moral stories for kids provide children with a precedent that can help them stay afloat during challenges. These stories act like guides and help children make the right choices. Reading moral stories and true-life stories help children to overcome adversities by inculcating strong values and self belief. Life does not come with a manual. With its intricate twists and turns, life can be really confusing. What can really help your children navigate through its ups and downs is a strong set of moral values and ethics. Kids who grow up in grounded and values enriched environment are less likely to astray as adults. Prepare them for their Role in Society The reason you send your children to school is to prepare them for their future role in the greater schema of society and life. A well-educated person who is a compulsive liar earns little respect. Though difficult to explain, this wisdom can be easily imparted through moral stories for kids. What prepares children for their role in society and as a good citizen, is the set of values they adhere to. Belief system is what distinguishes a cop from a thief. Both could be equally clever but will certainly have different places in the society. Short moral stories for kids help children make this distinction between right and wrong. Counter Bad influence It is easy to go awry when all you see is negative influence. Peer pressure is immense these days. Most adults confess to starting their addiction to smoking, drinking and the likes under peer pressure. Moral stories for kids can help counter this by building a strong sense of belonging and laying a rock solid foundation of moral values. A good set of values can be of great help to your children in such circumstances. Such children do not succumb easily to peer pressure and are less likely to develop bad habits growing up. However, over the past few years there has been a steady deterioration in the value system. We can’t really blame anyone! Parents are increasingly busier. Schools are more engaged than ever in academia and physical grooming of students. Add to this, the explosion of media in all its forms be it digital or visual. The onus, thus, primarily falls on you to inculcate values and ethics in your children. Grandmas are not as available as before, to narrate short stories for kids enriched with good morals and lessons. But what is indeed available is a great collection of short moral stories for kids. Quick Tip: Also explore Podcast for Kindergarteners ! These podcasts are a wonderful way to keep kids entertained without screen time. Moral Stories for Kids Vice of Greed Moral Stories For Kids Greediness is defined as an excessive, unreasonable selfish want for something. What is essential to understand that greed is limited to ‘Wants’ and not ‘Needs’. Teaching your children to distinguish between the two is essential. There is no end to wants. Often the child, who cries every time he visits a toy store, is the one who does not understand the difference between greed and want. Helping your child understand his needs can pave a way for contentment, gratitude as well as value for money. These vice of greed moral stories for kids help your kids understand and differentiate needs from wants and in turn keep them away from being greedy. 1. The Fisherman And His Wife This is simple, age old moral story that perfectly brings out the perils of greed. One of the most loved preschool stories, this story is about a poor fisherman who catches a fish, which is actually an enchanted prince. The fish requests the fisherman to let him go and grants him a wish. Moral of the Story This story highlights the vicious circle of greed, how it is self-fuelling and never-ending. 2. The Goose and the Golden Eggs Another story about excessive wants and how it eventually harms us. An Aesop fable, this story has been translated into many languages across countries. It is a story about a Goose who laid one Golden egg everyday for its master. But with time its master became greedy and his greed leads to his misfortune. Moral of the Story Excessive greed leads to destruction. 3. King Midas and the Golden Touch This is one of the most popular short story for kids that will teach your children learn what is truly essential in life. Help your children understand the true source of happiness and joy in life with this tale. Moral of the Story You should be happy with what you have and not act greedy. 4. The Greedy Dog This is a perfect story to teach your children about the consequences of being greedy. A funny tale, it revolves around a Dog and how his greed makes a fool out of dog. Moral of the Story You will loose what you have if you will want everything, every time. Be content. Related: Also explore these Fun Bedtime Stories for Kids to foster bonding. 5. The Greedy Crane This classic fable from Panchatantra, teaches children the consequences of being greedy. It is a story about a crane and its greed. The story is a perfect way to illustrate the moral that we should be happy with what we have and not be greedy for more. Moral of the Story Beware of a greedy person’s real intentions. Being greedy is self-destructive. Related: If these stories are adding way too much to your child’s screen time limits, try Podcasts for Kids . Podcasts are an excellent way to listen to child-friendly stories (and much more…think science, music, history) without hurting the eyes. Truth & Lies Moral Stories For Kids The first thing most parents teach their children is to tell the truth. Being honest and truthful is one of the highest valued virtues. No one likes a person who lies. Teach your children the significance of telling truth and how lying can land them in trouble with the aid of following Truth & Lies Moral Stories for Kids. 6. The Boy who cried Wolf An age old story about how lying can land us in trouble, this is a favorite with many kids. Help your children understand the difference between joking and lying with this story. Moral of the Story Nobody trusts a person who lies. 7. Donkey in the Lion’s Skin An Aesop’s fable, this is a great story to teach your children that lying does no good. Lying and tricking people can land us in big trouble and it is always best to stay truthful. Moral of the Story You should not try to copy someone else. Your lies will reveal your true intentions. 8. Pinocchio Who can forget the story of a boy who became a compulsive liar? Pinocchio’s story teaches children that lying can easily become a habit and it is no good to lie. One of the most loved preschool stories of all time, it is certain to delight your kids and teach them the significance of being truthful. Moral of the Story You will get caught in your own web of lies. 9. No more Lying This is a perfect story with morals that revolves around a child who lies when he feels scared. A common scenario with children! However, besides teaching children, it also delivers strong message to parents as well on how to inculcate honesty. Moral of the Story You should lie to cover your mistakes. Always speak the truth. 10. Honest Woodcutter One of the beloved short stories for kids, this tale teaches your children the perils of lies and how honesty is the best policy. It is a story of an honest and a greedy woodcutter. It imparts an important lesson on how honest people receive help while those who cheat suffer. Moral of the Story Being truthful brings you rewards. Quarrel Stories With Morals For Kids Help your little ones understand the power of staying together and not fighting. Quarrelling does not do anyone good. Inculcating the spirit of unity and not picking up fights trying to show who is better is something all parents have to work on. Teach your kids that together they can make a team through these Quarrels Stories with Moral for Kids. 11. The Sun and The Wind A classic tale about the natural forces and how they quarrel trying to out do each other. A simple short story for kids with a good lesson. Moral of the Story Gentle persuasion is stronger than force. 12. Fox and The Stork This is a story of a stork and a fox and how they try to out-do each other. Instead of fighting and trying to prove oneself better, we all are better off with our own set of qualities. We need not fight over them. Moral of the Story Behave with others the way you wish to be treated. 13. Two Foolish Cats This is a must watch for every child. The preschool story for kids efficiently delivers the message that arguing does you no good. Rather, other people can take advantage if we fight. Moral of the Story Other people will take advantage of your quarrelling. 14. Lion and the Wild Boar An excellent story about how a lion and a wild boar realise that squabbling is not a way to resolve differences and fighting would only harm. Moral of the Story Fighting does not benefit anyone. Resolve conflicts peacefully. 15. Frog and the Ox This story helps children understand that we should appreciate each other and not try to act smarter. It is especially relevant in the current competitive scenario. Teach your child to appreciate his/her own talents and appreciate other’s capabilities with this short story for kids. Moral of the Story Do not try to outsmart anyone. Spirit of Friendship Moral Stories for Kids Friendship cannot fall behind when you teach your children about moral values and ethics. Friendship is one of the most sacred bonds. It is like choosing your family, your people who will stay with you in need. Help your kids understand what friendship is all about with these Spirit of Friendship Moral Stories for Kids 16. The Lion and The Mouse The first story that comes to mind when teaching about friendship. This story lays down the first rule of friendship in a most delightful way – No one is too small or too big to be your friend. Moral of the Story Your one kind act can win you a friend for life. 17. True Friends Always Help Each Other This is a cute story that depicts the love between pals. What do you do when your friend is sad? Leave her or try to make her happy again? This is story about caring for your friends and doing things for them, even when it is hard. Moral of the Story True friends take care of each other. 18. Bond of friendship An ancient tale about how to keep your friends and maintain the precious bond of friendship. This short story for kids will teach your children how to peacefully resolve conflicts with their friends. Moral of the Story You should not let small differences ruin your friendship. 19. The Four Friends A Panchatantra story about four friends and how together they stand strong to defeat the hunter. One of the most famous among the preschool stories for kids, this one never fails to deliver a strong message. Moral of the Story A friend in need is a friend indeed. 20. The Monkey And The Crocodile While you teach your children about making friends, also enlighten them to choose friends wisely. After all, a bad friend can be worse than an enemy. Moral of the Story Choose your friends wisely. 21. Elephant and Friends One of the best moral stories for kids, Elephant and Friends teaches children an important lesson in friendship. It is a story about an elephant whom nobody wants to be friends with. But when the elephant comes to save the animals, all of them learn an important lesson – Not to choose friends based on how they look. Moral of the Story Friends come in every shape and size. Hard Work Moral Stories for Kids The power of hard work and positive attitude can triumph over biggest challenges. In the current world of instant gratification, it is essential to teach children the value of hard work and patience. These short Hard Work Moral Stories for Kids will help your kids understand that through the virtue of hard work, biggest obstacles can be turned into opportunities. 22. The Lazy Girl & The Diligent Girl This is a great story to teach kids work ethics and how working on time is important. The story revolves around two classmates – one who is lazy and the other who is sincere. The latter works hard and regularly while the former keep her work for the last minute. Later, she realises her mistake when she is unable to finish her work on time. Moral of the Story You should complete your work on time and not keep it for last minute. 23. The Crow and The Pitcher A parched crow finds a pitcher but the water is too low for its beak to reach. But with the help of a clever idea and lots of hard work, he manages to get the water. Moral of the Story With some cleverness and hard work, you can turn adversity into opportunity. 24. The Salt Merchant and The Donkey A donkey carrying load accidentally falls into a stream, only to realise that the load it was carrying has become lighter. When it tries to lighten its load again, its master plays a clever trick on it teaching the donkey a lesson. Moral of the Story You should not shy from working hard. 25. Grasshopper and The Ants This classic Aesop’s fable is a hit with children. It is preschool story about a grasshopper who shirks its work for frolic and play. But the ants, even though much tinier than the grasshopper, work hard and save themselves from the bitter cold. Moral of the Story You should not procrastinate your work. First work and then play. 26. Garden of Hard Work A poor man Maniram works hard and sincerely to make his ends meet. His hard work and sincerity pays off one day when he gets the to fulfil his dream. Moral of the Story Through the virtue of hard work you can make all your dreams come true. Kindness Moral Stories for Kids We all wish to raise happy children . One way to ensure their happiness is through inculcating the virtue of kindness. Kindness is good for self-esteem and emotional well being. Scientifically speaking, engaging in acts of kindness releases oxytocin, serotonin and endorphins – the feel-good biochemicals responsible behind sense of happiness and joy. This makes it indispensable virtue and quintessential to teach children to be kind . And what could be better way to teach children than narrate them Kindness Moral Stories for Kids, which will not only entertain them but also help them learn to be kind. 27. Kindness Works As Magic This is the perfect short story for kids to teach how they can win someone through kindness. Pratap Singh, an unkind, rude man does not like helping anyone. Everyone in the village despises him and maintains a distance from him. But one another man, Ramdas, comes to the village and decides to teach Pratap Singh a lesson – through kindness. Moral of the Story You can change even a cruel person’s heart through kindness. 28. The Ant and The Dove A dove was sitting on a branch when it spots a drowning ant. Thinking quickly, it drops a leaf for the ant to climb onto, thus saving the ant’s life. Few days later, when a bird hunter comes to the forest, the ant returns the dove’s act of kindness by saving its life. Moral of the Story Kind and compassionate behaviour pays you back. 29. Always Be Kind to Others Nandu the deer is hungry and nobody notices him expect for Humpy the hippo. Humpy decides to forego his food to let Nandu eat and urging his friends to share their lunch with Nandu. Moral of the Story Be kind to your friends. 30. Mr Kind and Mr Unkind This is a story about two farmers. One of them is kind while the other one is cruel. When thieves come to the village, it is the kind man who gets saved from being robbed while the unkind man bears the consequences of his bad behaviour. Moral of the Story Acts of kindness help you in unseen, unexpected ways. 31. The Lost Dog A girl named Lucy looses her pet dog. Sandra and Chris offer their help and are finally able to locate the dog. Turns out Lucy is a princess and they get invited for a royal party. Moral of the Story Acts of kindness pay forward in unexpected ways. Happiness Stories with Moral for Kids Happiness is a choice that has to be painstakingly cultivated. In the present world of instant gratification, it is no wonder children (and adults!) struggle to be happy . Through these Happiness Stories with Moral for Kids, children can learn that happiness is a state of mind that is achieved through mindful choices and is independent of things you buy or social approval. 32. Secret of Happiness Three brothers are granted their wishes by an old woman to make them happy. However, after an year they realise that they are no longer happy even though their wishes had come true. They revisit the old woman who teaches the true meaning of happiness. Moral of the Story Things cannot make you happy. Being content and grateful is the key to happiness. 33. Stay Happy Akshay though smartest in the class and beloved child of his parents is always unhappy. He finds reasons to be sad. A new student, Shrey, comes to the class and makes Akshay realise that happiness is within each one of us. Moral of the Story We should count our blessing and be thankful. Finding faults leads to unhappiness. 34. How to be Happy Wendy is sad ever since her best friend left the school. One day aunt Mari comes to her house and realises that Wendy is always sad. On enquiring, Wendy tells her aunt why she is sad. Aunt Maria teaches her how to be happy again and shows her nothing can make her sad without her consent. Moral of the Story Take responsibility for your happiness. Nothing can make you sad without your permission. 35. Happiness Mantra Happiness is a choice. This story narrates how a crow finds out what it truly means to be happy. In its quest to be happy, he wishes to be a swan but learns that swan is not happy himself and wishes to be someone else. It leads the crow to discover that many other animals, like himself, feels that other animals are happier than themselves. Finally, the crow goes to the peacock. On listening to what the peacock had to say about happiness, crow learns his lesson. Moral of the Story Learn to be happy with what you have and do not compare your happiness with others. Moral Story Books for Kids This is a great collection of Aesop’s fables from Usborne. The stories are segregated into buckets, each catering to a different moral. Easy to understand language along with pretty illustrations make this book a treasure. Panchatantra moral stories are centuries old and continue to captivate children and adults alike. This book lists six stories from Panchtantra, guiding its young readers towards better conduct and moral ethics. 3. 365 Moral Stories Here is a book with a moral lesson for every day of an year. Packed with 365 short stories, this is a perfect read for children as young as 2-year-old. Related: Also explore Diwali Books for Kids to learn about the Festival Of Lights. What could be better if you could teach a life lesson in a matter of two minutes? These short, sweet stories impart valuable moral lessons and just finish before your child’s attention dwindles. 5. 199 Moral Stories Each story in this book comes with a lovely illustration and is intriguing enough to keep the interest alive. Suitable for 3 to 6-year-old. Suited for tweens and teens, this book is abounding with quotes that can change the thought process. Particularly great at instilling values without running the risk of being preachy. This is a go-to-guide for happiness. Finding joys in simple daily routine to helping someone, this book unearths the secret to being happy. Highly recommended for children 4years and above. Life is all about the decisions we make. Help your children unlock the power of making the correct decisions with this heartwarming book. This book will guide your children to make correct decisions for themselves by inculcating correct moral values and ethics. This is a beautiful collection of age old Buddhist tales that will inspire your kids (and you!) and help them make wise decisions. These character building stories for kids make for perfect preschool stories that your kids will adore. Beautiful artwork and easy to understand language makes it a great choice of moral stories for kids. Often, through the medium of stories, children learn invaluable lessons of life. Make these story sessions interactive, share your experiences, seek your children’s opinions around the stories to help them understand better. See if you can find and tell stories that improve their STEM knowledge . Watching or Reading these stories with your children will help them understand the essential virtues of life. They will help you lay the foundation of their character. FAQ What are some good moral stories for kids? 1. The Greedy Crane 2. Honest Woodcutter 3. Lion and the Wild Boar 4. The Four Friends 5. The Crow and the Pitcher 6. Kindness works as magic 7. Secret of happiness What life lessons & moral values kids learn from moral stories? 1. Greed is always harmful 2. Virtues of being truthful 3. Spirit of friendship 4. Power of hard work 5. Kindness for self-esteem 6. Quarrelling does no good to anyone 7. Happiness comes with right choices Why are moral stories important for kids? 1. Help kids build resilience 2. Counter bad influence 3. Prepare them for their role in society Also Read: Best Collection of Panchatantra Stories for Kids How Children Benefit from Simple Life Inspiring STEM Books for Children