CAR GIVEAWAY CONTEST To enter the contest, tell us how a new car could change your life and where it would take you in 2026 and beyond! share now and enter 1st Defense ™ Checking 1st Defense™ checking¹ was designed to simplify your life and save you money with built-in benefits like identity protection, travel & leisure discounts, shopping rewards and more. Get The Details LOCK IN YOUR SAVINGS RATE Protect your money and watch it grow with an 11-month Members 1st Certificate at 3.85% Annual Percentage Yield¹. Learn more THINK FIRST, STAY SECURE Fraud-proof your day with a thoughtful delay. Stay a step ahead of fraud with our tips and tools. Show Me The Tips REFER AND SCORE $50 Bring home the win! Refer your your friends to Members 1st. When they join, you'll both earn a $50 reward! Start Referring SIGN IN. Welcome to Members 1st Members 1st is more than just a name—it's a mindset. Everything we do is in the best interest of all of us. We're here to help members thrive and better the communities we serve. Where others see dollars and cents, we see people and passions. And we offer a full suite of financial tools and services that help our members do more with their money. We're Here to Help Getting ready for life's moments and milestones Visa Signature ® Card Get 1.5% cash back (or 1.5 points) on every dollar you spend. On top of that, you get emergency medical coverage, trip interruption insurance, and Visa Signature Concierge Service—all with no annual fee. Get Started Protect Protecting what you care about shouldn’t be complicated or unaffordable. Our third-party insurance partners offer a full range of personal, group, auto, health and life insurance plans through the most respected companies in the business. Get started Buying a House Your home will likely be the biggest investment you ever make. Here's everything you need to know—and who to talk to if you'd like some personalized guidance. Get Started Goal Savings Save for big plans—a little at a time. With great rates and powerful in-app tools, it's never been easier to set (and achieve) your long-term goals. Get Started Hit the Road Hear that? It's the open road calling. Here's how to get an auto loan quicker and smarter. Get Started Off to College Welcome to the start of a new beginning. Here's how to avoid student loans and make the most of saving for college. Get Started Act now Exclusive Membership Offers Home Equity Loans 10-Year Fixed Rate as low as 5.99 % APR* Learn More Visa Balance Transfer Transfer your balance and start saving today. Choose your offer Certificates Check out our special certificate promotions and start growing your money today. GET STARTED 1st Defense™ Checking¹ Experience a checking account that simplifies your life and saves you money with benefits like identity protection, travel & leisure discounts, cell phone protection², 24/7 roadside assistance² and more—all for just $6.95/month. GET STARTED Manage your money in less time, anytime Our mobile app gives you the power to check your balance, deposit checks, send money, chat with us, and more. Get The App What our members are saying: From our Members “Members 1st has always been there to support me with my financial goals. They truly treat everyone like family.” Sara B. Member since 1995 From our Members “They’re sincerely interested in you as a member. I can’t tell you how many times they’ve helped me out of messes I got myself into. Any problem you have, they can fix it for you." Connie W. Member since 2011 Become A Member Looking to join our credit union? Not sure how it all works? No problem—it's far easier than you imagine. At Members 1st, we are always seeking new members to join our family, and we have a number of flexible options to make the eligibility process simple and fun. Open an account TOP Please be aware that by continuing you will be leaving www.members1st.org and viewing content from another website. For your protection please be advised that public Internet email is not secure. Various links within our web site allow you to submit information to us by public Internet email. Please DO NOT provide personal or account information through public email or submit any personal information that would compromise your identity including your account number, social security number, credit card numbers, electronic services PINs, passwords or mother's maiden name. Members 1st will not respond via public Internet email to requests-for-account-information or account activity. Please contact Customer Service with these types of requests at (800) 237-7288 or (717) 795-6049.