There are options, but you need to understand that only you know when you have read an email. I can't find a setting that will allow marking messages as read only after I read them. By that I mean only after I click on the message to open it in its own tab. You seem to be very specific about what term as opened - but do you have the 'Message Pane enabled ? If yes then when you select an email in the Message List and it displays in Message Pane, that means you have opened the email - it is not a preview. If you disable the Message Pane then you can select (single left click or use arrow keys to ) any email in list and nothing alters as you have not opened it. That would mean using a double click to open email in a new tab at which point email is opened. So in Settings > General scroll down to 'REading and Display' If you have enabled 'Message Pane then this setting will auto mark as read upon opening in Message Pane. If you have disabled the Message Pane then the following will auto mark as read when you double click to open in a new tab. Select 'Automatically mark messages as read' select 'Immediately upon display' OR you can choose to delay and mark as read after x seconds. Open messages in : select 'A new tab' This means a double click will open in a new tab. If you insist on wanting to use the Message Pane then you might prefer to opt for the 'delay' option, but obviously you would then only have x number of seconds before selecting another else it will get marked as read. Otherwise you would need to not select 'Automatically mark messages as read' This means it's now up to you to mark each manually as read. There are various methods to do this: In Message List click on the small green dot in the 'sort by read status' column header. Right click on message in list and click on the top left 'mark as read' icon You can also use the 'Unified Toolbar' - you can put a 'Mark' button on toolbar and use it instead after selecting an email. Use the Menu Bar' toolbar : Message > Mark > As Read Or keyboard : 'Alt'+'M' then 'K' then 'R' In opened email - Message Header - More > Mark as REad In opened email - click on the shortcut key 'M' and it will either mark as read or unread depending upon current status. This is probably one of the quickest methods. As you can see there are many options and it's up to you to choose which suits you. There are options, but you need to understand that only you know when you have read an email. I can't find a setting that will allow marking messages as read only after I read them. By that I mean only after I click on the message to open it in its own tab. You seem to be very specific about what term as opened - but do you have the 'Message Pane enabled ? If yes then when you select an email in the Message List and it displays in Message Pane, that means you have opened the email - it is not a preview. If you disable the Message Pane then you can select (single left click or use arrow keys to ) any email in list and nothing alters as you have not opened it. That would mean using a double click to open email in a new tab at which point email is opened. So in Settings > General scroll down to 'REading and Display' If you have enabled 'Message Pane then this setting will auto mark as read upon opening in Message Pane. If you have disabled the Message Pane then the following will auto mark as read when you double click to open in a new tab. * Select 'Automatically mark messages as read' * select 'Immediately upon display' OR you can choose to delay and mark as read after x seconds. Open messages in : * select 'A new tab' * This means a double click will open in a new tab. If you insist on wanting to use the Message Pane then you might prefer to opt for the 'delay' option, but obviously you would then only have x number of seconds before selecting another else it will get marked as read. Otherwise you would need to not select 'Automatically mark messages as read' This means it's now up to you to mark each manually as read. There are various methods to do this: * In Message List click on the small green dot in the 'sort by read status' column header. * Right click on message in list and click on the top left 'mark as read' icon * You can also use the 'Unified Toolbar' - you can put a 'Mark' button on toolbar and use it instead after selecting an email. * Use the Menu Bar' toolbar : Message > Mark > As Read * Or keyboard : 'Alt'+'M' then 'K' then 'R' * In opened email - Message Header - More > Mark as REad * In opened email - click on the shortcut key 'M' and it will either mark as read or unread depending upon current status. This is probably one of the quickest methods. As you can see there are many options and it's up to you to choose which suits you.