You can search anything you find with Google Lens in Chrome. For example, you can select an image of a shirt on a page to know where to buy it or take a photo of an animal to identify it. Search with Google Lens Important: Set Google as your default search engine . To search on a page with Google Lens: On your computer, open Chrome. Go to a website. At the top right, select More Search with Google Lens . You can also right-click on a page and select Search with Google Lens . With Google Lens, you can: Ask questions about the content of the page you’re on: At the top right of the screen, in the search box or on the side panel, enter your question. The answers to your question are provided by Google Lens based on the content of the page. Select anything to search: On a webpage, click, highlight text, or select and drag anywhere on the page. After selection, to ask follow up questions about the text or image, in the side panel, enter additional search terms or keywords. You may find AI Overviews in your Google Search results. Learn about AI Overviews . To close the side panel, you can: Select anywhere in the live page area. Press Esc . In the side panel, select Close . Tips: Search results display in the side panel. To open a result in a new tab, select the search result. In the toolbar, you can pin “Search with Google Lens.” Learn how to pin and unpin a specific side panel . To remove the Google Lens button in the address bar, right-click in the address bar and uncheck Always show Google Lens shortcut . Additional ways to search with Google Lens From the address bar From an image Right-click the image. Select Search with Google Lens . Or, right-click anywhere outside an image. From the menu, you can select Search with Google Lens . How your page data is processed by Google Lens To use Google Lens for the first time, you’ll need to agree to the processing of page data. To help select objects on the page, a screenshot of the page and page data will be sent to Google. When you use Lens to search webpage content in Chrome, Google doesn't save any data beyond temporary storage for processing the specific query. Neither the page nor image is used for training as a result of this. When you select part of the page, the selection is sent to Google Search. To manage or delete your Search activity, go to My Google Activity . Related resources