This article is for teachers. Students, go here. If you’re new to Classroom, this article will show you around and help you complete some common tasks. Get started To get started as a teacher, complete these steps: Sign in to Classroom . Choose an option: Invite students to your class . You can do this step later. After you sign in and have a class, you’re ready to complete common tasks or explore Classroom. Complete common tasks Open all | Close all Explore Classroom Open all | Close all Explore the Home page On the Home page, you can view and enter all your classes. Think of it as your Classroom Home page. To open the Home page: Overview of the Home page Each class you create gets a class card. To enter a class, click the class name on the card Tips: To return to the Home page from within a class, at the top left, click Menu Home . To minimize the menu to a collapsed version, at the top left, click Menu . On the Home page, you can also: Common tasks on the Home page Explore the Stream page To open the Stream page for a class: On a class card, click the class name. You’re now in the class, on the Stream page. Overview of the Stream page Along with posting announcements, you can also: In class Settings, you manage your class details, invite codes, video meeting link, and grading system. The class Settings are an important part of your Classroom experience. Common tasks on the Stream page Explore the Classwork page On the Classwork page, you can create and post classwork and materials for your students. You can organize your posts under topics you create. To open the Classwork page for a class: On a class card, click the class name. At the top, click Classwork . Overview of the Classwork page Classwork includes assignments, questions, and quiz assignments. After you publish a post, students can click it to begin their work. On each post, teachers can see student work status, such as Turned in or Missing . On the Classwork page, you can also: Common tasks on the Classwork page Explore the People page On the People page, you can see everyone in the class, send emails, and invite people to join the class. Think of the People page as your class roster. To open the People page for a class: On a class card, click the class name. At the top, click People . Overview of the People page Under Teachers , you see all the teachers in the class. Under Students, you see all the students in the class. If you send email invites, you see Invited next to people's names until they join the class. On the People page, you can also: Common tasks on the People page Explore the Grades page On the Grades page, you can view, enter, and return grades. Only teachers have the Grades page. The Grades page is also known as your gradebook. To open the Grades page for a class: Choose an option: On a class card, click Open gradebook . On a class card, click the class name at the top, click Grades. Overview of the Grades page Along with viewing, entering, and returning grades, you can also open student submissions from the Grades page. When you enter grades in other areas of Classroom, such as the grading tool, the grades automatically update to the Grades page. Common tasks for the Grades page Related resources Related articles