Children love reading stories about children. Some parents are concerned about the message a story might convey to their children about anything other than love, caring, honesty and respect. Short Story With Moral Lesson Story For Kids With Moral Others wonder if a story about animals or nature would be educational. Most people want to know what story to read for children with moral values. Short Story With A Moral The following list of examples should give you a place to start: A Boy and His Blob , by A. Wolf. Who wrote a book about a boy who had a blob. Who is this boy? It is called A Boy And His Blob, and author A. Wolf has given us an adorable little classic. Little Britain . This is a wonderful book that has a lot of humor. It is the story of two British children who accidentally land in America. It’s a wonderful story about how they accidentally land in America and become best friends. Noah’s Ark. is a story about a boy who finds a goat but soon realizes that he has to kill a sheep to get the goat. He decides to sacrifice the best lamb instead of killing it. This is the first story that teaches children. It’s called Noah’s Ark, and it’s a great story for children. Hindu Mythology . If you’re looking for a short story for kids with moral lessons, then these two stories should be worth a read. They are Mahabharata and Ramayana. These stories tell amazing stories about the lives of mythological Hindu characters. Short Stories in Hindi with Moral Values. There are many short stories in India that have moral values for children. Two such fantastic stories are Hate Story by Kamala Markandya and Mother and Child by Om Prakash. Both stories are inspired by Hindu mythology and tell amazing stories about sacrifice and overcoming obstacles. They still hold true to their moral lessons. Hindi Movie Genres. Many of the best Indian movies have story elements that kids can relate to. This makes them a great choice for short stories. You can find all sorts of films related to moral goodness and values. These include Rajneeti, Kaal Bhairat, Dilbung Bhaveer, Apne, Kismet, Rajneeti, Tintin, and more. Humorous Short Stories For Kids With morals and values. Many short stories can be suitable, appropriate, or even great for children with morals. Some are about a boy who doesn’t know what he wants to do with his life, and so he joins a boxing academy to learn how to box. One day, he wins the first-ever boxing championship and becomes the greatest boxing champion the world has ever seen. The movie then reminds us about what happened, and we see him again as the greatest boxing trainer ever. English Proverbs and Kids Proverbs. In addition to the above-mentioned short stories for kids with morals and values, you can also find many English proverbs in the same genre. You can find examples such as The Battle of Life and The Fly; A Boy Named Sam. Love Stories for Kids. There are some amazing books out in the market today, which teach kids to write short stories, which tell us about their favorite characters and situations. Most of these books are written lovely and full of love stories and lessons about love and morals. All these kids’ moral stories are available electronically, and you can easily download them from the internet. You can also purchase any of these books at the best bookstores in the country. However, it is highly recommended that you should always select an e-book from a well-known online e-book store.