You can download and install the Chrome web browser at no charge, and use it to browse the web. How to install Chrome Important: Before you download, you can check if Chrome supports your operating system and other system requirements. Windows On your computer, download the installation file . To install the file, follow the on-screen instructions. If you get the message 'Do you want to allow this app to make changes to your device', select Yes . Open Chrome. Tip: If you've used a different browser, like Firefox, you can import your settings into Chrome . If you have issues when you download Chrome on your Windows computer, use the alternative link to download Chrome on a different computer. On your computer, download a Chrome installer for a different computer. At the bottom of the page, under 'Chrome family', select Other platforms . Select the OS of the device that you wish to install Chrome on. Download the file. Move the file to the computer where you want to install Chrome. To install, follow the on-screen instructions. Mac To use Chrome on Mac, you'll need macOS 12 Monterey and up. On your computer, download the installation file . Open the file named 'googlechrome.dmg'. In the window that opens, you can find Chrome. Drag Chrome to the Applications folder. You may have to enter the admin password. If you don't know the admin password, drag Chrome to a place on your computer where you can make edits, like your desktop. Tip: To clean up after the install, in the Finder's sidebar, to the right of Chrome, select Eject . Linux To install Chrome, use the same software that installs programs on your computer. You'll need to enter the administrator account password. On your computer, download the installation file . To open the package, select OK Install package . To make sure that Chrome stays up to date, it's added to your software manager. Chromebook Check system requirements to use Chrome Windows To use Chrome on Windows with an: Intel processor, you'll need: Windows 10 and up. An Intel Pentium 4 processor or up that's SSE3 capable. ARM processor, you'll need: Mac To use Chrome on Mac, you'll need: macOS 12 Monterey and up. Linux To use Chrome on Linux, you'll need: 64-bit Ubuntu 18.04+, Debian 10+, openSUSE 15.5+ or Fedora Linux 39+. An Intel Pentium 4 processor or up that's SSE3 capable. Related resources