Firefox comes with a set of default search engines, and you can add more from websites, add-ons, or partner pages. Some users want to add fully custom search engines, but Firefox only supports this in limited cases without an add-on. This article explains what you can and can’t do, and shows the easiest ways to manage your search engines. Note: Some search engines may only be available in certain regions. What Firefox supports (and what it doesn’t) Built-in default search engines (like Google, Bing, DuckDuckGo). Adding search engines from websites that support it. Adding search engine add-ons from addons.mozilla.org . Limited support for custom engines: Starting in Firefox version 140 , you are able to add custom unsupported search engines in Firefox Settings. In earlier versions, Firefox does not allow you to create custom engines from scratch in Settings. You would need an extension such as Add custom search engine . Add search engines From the Search bar Firefox offers an optional Search bar. If you’ve added it to your toolbar, you can also add search engines. If you haven’t yet, see Add the Search bar to your Firefox toolbar to add it to Firefox. Visit a website that offers an OpenSearch search engine (we'll use YouTube as an example). Click the magnifying glass icon in the Search bar. Click the YouTube icon in the Search bar drop-down. The search engine will appear in your available search options. From the address bar Visit a website that has a built-in search field (for example, YouTube ). Right-click Right-click (or hold down the Control key while you click) inside the search field. Select from the context menu. Add a search engine from the search field of a supported website Right-click Right-click (or hold down the Control key while you click) the search field of a supported website and select from the context menu. To learn more, see the Add custom search engines in Firefox article. Mycroft Project search engine plugins The Mycroft Project website offers search engine plugins. When you click an available search plugin, you can add it to Firefox from the Search bar or from the address bar context menu, on the Install plugin page. Search engine add-ons Many providers offer search engine add-ons. To find these search engines and add them to Firefox: In the Menu bar at the top of the screen, click and select (select on older macOS versions). Click the menu button and select . Select in the left panel. At the bottom, click the Find more search engines link. The Firefox Add-ons website will open. Select the search engine add-on you want to install and click Add to Firefox . Tip: If you added the optional Search bar, another way to open the Search panel is to click the magnifying glass on the Search bar and then click the Change search settings icon. Add a custom search engine in Settings You can add custom search engines from websites in Firefox, even if they’re not supported. In the Menu bar at the top of the screen, click and select (select on older macOS versions). Click the menu button and select . Go to . Scroll down to Search Shortcuts . Click Add . Fill in the Search engine name with a name for your custom search engine. In the URL box, copy & paste the URL of the custom search engine. Replace the URL’s search tag with %s . Add a keyword (this is optional). Click Add Engine to save. Note: You can find the URL’s search tag by performing a unique search with an easy-to-spot word, such as “ZZZZZZ”. The “ZZZZZZ” in the URL is that URL’s search tag. Hide search engines Follow these steps to remove alternative search engines you don't want to use. In the Menu bar at the top of the screen, click and select (select on older macOS versions). Click the menu button and select . In the Settings tab that opens, click in the left pane. Under Search Shortcuts , remove the check mark next to each search engine you don't want to use. Remove search engines To remove a search engine, follow these steps: In the Menu bar at the top of the screen, click and select (select on older macOS versions). Click the menu button and select . Go to in the left panel. Under Search Shortcuts , click the search engine you want to remove. Click the Remove button to take it off your list. Note: If a search engine is added back after you restart Firefox, it may be a Firefox extension . Those can be removed using the Add-ons manager (see Disable or remove Add-ons for details). Restore default search engines If you removed one of Firefox’s built-in search engines (like Google or Bing): In the Menu bar at the top of the screen, click and select (select on older macOS versions). Click the menu button and select . Go to in the left panel. In the Search shortcuts section, click Restore Default Search Engines . Related articles