Banking Made easy Our free online banking system which gives you 24/7 access to managing your finances. View account summaries or account detail. Set up email alerts tailored to specific account needs. Open various savings accounts . Apply for consumer loans and our Visa® credit card . Make transfers within own account, to another member's account (Cross Account Transfers), or to an account at another financial institution (EZ Transfer).* Send money to another person via email or text directly from savings/checking accounts. Pay loan (s) and Visa® credit cards. Reorder checks. View your cleared checks, ATM and Debit transactions. Update your address, email address, phone number and other profile information. Access, view and print your electronic statements and electronic notices.*** View and print your tax reporting forms regarding dividends earned or mortgage interest paid. Manage your Visa credit card account. Chat with us ( limited hours ). Access Bill Pay.** Quarterly FICO score. Control your cards online with Card Controls. DocuSign offers a secure way to electronically sign and track documents. Lock-in Home Equity Freedom fixed rate. *Subject to our Funds Availability Policy and Electronic Funds Transfer Agreement and Fee Schedule. Ask for details. **Free Online Bill Pay is offered to all Consumer Checking accounts. Free Bill Pay does not apply to Business Checking account. Ask for details. ***Ask for details. Recover Username Have you forgotten your username? No worries, you can recover it online. Reset Your Password Do you need to reset your password? You can do that online, too. Enroll for Online Banking You do not have online banking, but you have an account. Open an Account You would like to become a member? Let's get started by opening an account. Common Questions Whether buying a home, car or other significant purchase requiring credit the FICO score is what lenders use to determine their risk when extending credit to consumers. FICO is used by 90% of top lenders to determine credit risk. We offer our members the ability to view their scores through Online Banking. Members under the age of 18 will not receive a score. Business Accounts will not have a score. Score is based on the individual logged into online banking . Scores are provided by TransUnion on a quarterly basis. New members who join after FICO scores are posted will not have a FICO score until the next quarter. TOP Please be aware that by continuing you will be leaving www.members1st.org and viewing content from another website. For your protection please be advised that public Internet email is not secure. Various links within our web site allow you to submit information to us by public Internet email. Please DO NOT provide personal or account information through public email or submit any personal information that would compromise your identity including your account number, social security number, credit card numbers, electronic services PINs, passwords or mother's maiden name. Members 1st will not respond via public Internet email to requests-for-account-information or account activity. Please contact Customer Service with these types of requests at (800) 237-7288 or (717) 795-6049.