The homepage is the first page Firefox opens when you launch it, click the Home button, or open a new window. The New Tab page is the default home page that opens when you start Firefox, click the Home button in the toolbar or open a new window. This article explains how to set your Firefox home page. If you want Firefox to open the windows and tabs from your previous session each time you start Firefox, instead of opening your home page, see Configuring session restore . Set or change your home page through the Home button Note: The Home button is not shown by default. You can add or remove the Home button by customizing the toolbar . If you don't have a Home button, you can set your home page through Firefox Settings (see below). The Home button will be added to the toolbar when a custom home page is set. Open the web page you want to use as your home page. Drag and drop that tab onto the Home button on your toolbar. Click Yes on the prompt to set this page as your home page. Set your home page through Firefox Settings In the Menu bar at the top of the screen, click and select (select on older macOS versions). Click the menu button and select . Click the panel. Click the menu next to Homepage and new windows and choose to show the default Firefox Home page, custom URLs or a blank page. If you want to use a specific search engine on your homepage: Go to your preferred search engine and copy the URL. Paste it into the “Custom URLs” field under Homepage and new windows . Set your new URL as your default search engine in . Set multiple pages as your home page You can set a group of pages as your home page. Open each page in a separate tab, select in the Homepage and new windows drop-down menu and click on Use Current Pages . Remove ads or customize content on your homepage If you see ads or unwanted content: Make sure you didn’t set a third-party site as your homepage. You can change your homepage to a blank page or a trusted site in . Consider using an add-on for a minimal or photo-based homepage. Having problems? We have solutions: Related articles