This article is for students. Co-teachers, go here . To use Classroom, sign in on your computer or mobile device and join classes. After you join a class, you can get assignments from your teacher and communicate with your classmates. You can join a class with: A class link: Your teacher sends you the link. A class code: Your teacher gives you the class code. An email invite: Your teacher sends you the invite. After you join a class on one device, you're enrolled in that class for all devices. To join a class, you must sign in to Classroom with the correct account. Learn how to sign in to Classroom . Join a class with a class link On your computer, click the class link your teacher shared. You must sign in with the correct account for Classroom. If you need to switch accounts: Before you try to join, click Switch accounts . Select or add your account. Click Join . Trouble joining a class? I forgot or lost the class code To join a class, you just need to enter the class code once. After you join, you don’t need to enter the code again. If you forget, lose, or delete the code before you join the class, ask your teacher to share it with you. My class code doesn’t work If the class code doesn’t work, check that: You’re signed in to Classroom with the correct account. Learn how to sign in to Classroom . The code you enter is 6 to 8 characters long, and uses letters and numbers. Codes can’t have spaces or use special characters. You enter the code correctly. This includes any capital letters or special characters. If you're sure that you entered the code correctly, contact your teacher as there might be a technical issue. If you still have trouble, let your teacher know. I don't have my class code. How can I get it? Contact your teacher: The easiest way to get your class code is to ask your teacher directly. They should be able to provide it. Check your email: Your teacher might send the class code in an email. Check your inbox and spam folder. How can I log in to Google Classroom? Where can I find help with joining a class? If you're sure that you entered the class code correctly, contact your teacher as there might be a technical issue. Related resources