Our Mission The Office of Student Living supports student success by promoting the holistic development of residential students through the cultivation of a healthy living/learning community. Our Values The office of Student Living empowers students and paraprofessional staff to learn about leadership, diversity, advocacy, and civic responsibility in order to apply these skills to the communities in which they belong to. Educational Priority The Educational Priority within our residential community is to prepare students to become responsible citizens in their current and future communities through holistic development and engagement in life-long learning. Student Learning Goals Inclusive Community Dynamics: Students will develop interpersonal skills in order to participate and peacefully coexist in a living community that celebrates individuality and expression. Community Development: Students will learn to recognize and appreciate the contributions of all individuals in the residential community. Continuous Learning: Students will showcase skills essential for continuous learning and autonomous living. Holistic Wellness: Students will develop skills and techniques to value the importance of holistic wellness and its impact on individual and collective communities. Operational Goals Student Experience: Enhance the student experience and student learning through engaging and impactful residential experiences. Facilities Management: Continuously improve existing facilities in order to enhance the residential experience. Marketing and Information Distribution: Enhance marketing, informational, and promotional media to engage students, campus partners, families, and prospective students. Staff Retention and Performance: Evaluate practices in order to attract and retain a diverse workforce that promotes rewarding employee experience and impactful employee performance. Learning Outcomes Student Leaders Student leaders will serve as effective leaders within the Office of Student Living. Student leaders will progressively demonstrate the ability to work effectively as a member of a team. Student leaders will progressively demonstrate the ability to utilize resources when effectively planning and implementing programs or events. Student leaders will demonstrate the ability to build an inclusive community where members demonstrate respect for one another. Student leaders will demonstrate the ability to mediate and manage conflicts and/or crisis situations. Student leaders will demonstrate professionalism and accountability within the Resident Assistant role. Residential Students Students who reside on campus will progressively demonstrate the interpersonal abilities to live, work, and socialize with people who are different from them within a community. Students who reside on campus will progressively demonstrate developmentally appropriate skills for lifelong learning.